[D&M] WIP cluster comms (#765)
elastic/docs-content: deploy-manage/security/secure-cluster-communications.md

| [{{kib}}-to-{{es}}](#kib-to-es-communications) | Communication from the {{kib}} server to {{es}} for user requests and queries | - TLS encryption<br>- Service authentication (API keys, service tokens, or mutual TLS) |

## Transport layer security

The transport layer is used for communication between {{es}} nodes in a cluster. Securing this layer prevents unauthorized nodes from joining your cluster and protects internode data.

**Deployment type notes:**
- **Elastic Cloud & Serverless**: Transport security is fully managed by Elastic. No configuration is required.
- **ECE/ECK**: Transport security is automatically configured by the operator. No direct user configuration is required.
- **Self-managed**: Transport security must be manually configured following the steps in [Set up basic security](set-up-basic-security.md).

## HTTP layer security

The HTTP layer secures client communication with your {{es}} cluster via its REST API, preventing unauthorized access and protecting data in transit.

> **Deployment type notes:**
> - **Elastic Cloud & Serverless**: HTTP security is fully managed by Elastic. No configuration is required.
> - **ECE/ECK**: HTTP security is automatically configured with self-signed certificates. Custom certificates can be configured.
> - **Self-managed**: HTTP security must be manually configured following [Secure HTTP communications](secure-http-communications.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Deployment type notes:**
- **Elastic Cloud & Serverless**: HTTP security is fully managed by Elastic. No configuration is required.
- **ECE**: HTTP security is automatically enforced at ECE proxies using self-signed certificates and a default [wildcard DNS record](/deploy-manage/deploy/cloud-enterprise/ece-wildcard-dns.md). However, it's recommended to [configure your own certificates](/deploy-manage/security/secure-your-elastic-cloud-enterprise-installation/manage-security-certificates.md).
- **ECK**: HTTP security is automatically configured with self-signed certificates. Custom certificates and domain names can be configured.
- **Self-managed**: HTTP security must be manually configured following [Secure HTTP communications](secure-http-communications.md).
```

## {{kib}}-to-{{es}} communications

{{kib}} connects to {{es}} as a client but requires special configuration as it performs operations on behalf of end users.

**Deployment type notes:**
- **Elastic Cloud & Serverless**: {{kib}}-{{es}} communication is fully managed using HTTPS and service tokens.
- **ECE/ECK**: {{kib}}-{{es}} communication is automatically secured with service tokens.
- **Self-managed**: {{kib}}-{{es}} communication must be manually secured. For mutual TLS configuration, see [Mutual TLS authentication between {{kib}} and {{es}}](secure-http-communications.md#elasticsearch-mutual-tls).

## Certificate management [generate-certificates]

Managing certificates is critical for secure communications. Certificates have limited lifetimes and must be renewed before expiry to prevent service disruptions.

**Deployment type notes:**
- **Elastic Cloud & Serverless**: Certificate management is fully automated by Elastic.
- **ECE**: ECE generates certificates for you. Refer to [](/deploy-manage/security/secure-your-elastic-cloud-enterprise-installation/manage-security-certificates.md).

> ECK**: Certificate generation and basic rotation is handled by the operator. Custom HTTP certificates require manual management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**ECK**: ECK provides flexible options for managing SSL certificates in your deployments, including automatic certificate generation and rotation, integration with external tools like `cert-manager`, or using your own custom certificates. Custom HTTP certificates require manual management.
```
